# 3.8: CRC-32 Code Validation

The STM32F030 family comes with a CRC calculation unit. It can be used
during startup to validate the integrity of the code in memory.

Cyclic Redundancy Check is a way to do error detection and correction. I
have already met CRC when dealing with the DS18B20 sensor where CRC-8 is
used during the scratchpad 9 bytes transmission.

The STM32 CRC calculation unit has the following default characteristic:

- POLY32 is 0x04C11DB7.

- Initialisation 0xFFFFFFFF.

- High bit first (left shift).

- 32 bit word input, little endian.

I don't plan to write a self-signing executable, so on top of the STM32
startup code validation, I will also write a sign32 command to sign
binary files during build.

## Implementation Steps

- Update **stm32f030xx.h** with the CRC calculation unit definitions.

- Update startup with `check_flash()` to be tested before `init()` is
  called.

- Update **generic.ld** with a new section used as placeholder for the CRC
  sum at the end of the flashable content.

- Write `sign32` command to sign a binary file.

- Update **Makefile** to sign the binary executable and create an intel hex
  version out of it.

## stm32f030xx.h

The CRC calculation unit is on the AHB bus and its clock need to be
enabled before use.

`#define RCC_AHBENR_CRCEN        (1 << 6)    /*  6: CRC clock enable */`

I will make use of the default setup so I only need to refer to the Data
Register and the Control Register. I create all register definitions as
there is a gap in the memory layout.

```c
#define CRC             ((volatile unsigned *) 0x40023000)
#define CRC_DR          CRC[ 0]
#define CRC_IDR         CRC[ 1]
#define CRC_CR          CRC[ 2]
#define CRC_INIT        CRC[ 4]
```

## startup.crc.c

I make a copy of **startup.ram.c** into **startup.crc.c**.

I use conditional compilation, the build option `CRC32SIGN` will be
defined in the Makefile.

The constant variable `crcsum` is a placeholder with the value
**DEADC0DE** in byte order. This value will be overriden by the computed
CRC value during build. The linker will put `crcsum` at the end of the
used FLASH.

`check_flash()` use the CRC calculation unit to compute the CRC value
from beginning of FLASH `isr_vector` to end of FLASH `crcsum`. If
`crcsum` value is the correct CRC, the computed result will be 0.

```c
#ifdef CRC32SIGN
const unsigned crcsum __attribute__((section(".crc_chk"))) = 0xDEC0ADDE ;

static int check_flash( void) {
    int ret = 0 ;

/* Flash CRC validation */
    RCC_AHBENR |= RCC_AHBENR_CRCEN ;  /* Enable CRC periph */
    CRC_CR = 1 ;                      /* Reset */
    if( CRC_DR == 0xFFFFFFFF) {       /* CRC periph is alive and resetted */
        const unsigned *wp = (const unsigned *) isr_vector ;
        while( wp <= &crcsum)
            CRC_DR = *wp++ ;

        ret = CRC_DR == 0 ;
    }

    RCC_AHBENR &= ~RCC_AHBENR_CRCEN ; /* Disable CRC periph */
    return ret ;
}
#endif
```

Flash content is checked before calling `init()`. This means the check
is done using the default clock setup of HSI 8 MHz.

```c
    if(
#ifdef CRC32SIGN
      check_flash() &&
#endif
      init() == 0)
        main() ;
```

## generic.ld

I add a new section to hold the CRC value placeholder. This needs to be
DWORD aligned and at the end of the used FLASH area.

```
    .crc __etext + SIZEOF(.data) :
    {
        KEEP(*(.crc_chk))
    } > FLASH
```

## sign32

The command `sign32` creates a **signed.bin** file from it's input file
specified as parameter.

```
$ touch empty.bin

$ ./sign32 empty.bin
FFFFFFFF empty.bin: 0, signed.bin: 4
```

If the input file is already signed, the output signed.bin is identical
to the input.

```
$ mv signed.bin FFFFFFFF.bin

$ ./sign32 FFFFFFFF.bin
00000000 FFFFFFFF.bin: 4, signed.bin: 4
```

Padding with null is done on the input to insure the calculation is
DWORD aligned.

```
$ echo > nl.bin

$ ./sign32 nl.bin
E88E0BAD nl.bin: 1, signed.bin: 8

$ hexdump -C signed.bin
00000000  0a 00 00 00 ad 0b 8e e8                           |........|
00000008

```

Calculation stops when the placeholder DEADC0DE is found or the end of
the input file is reached.

I create a folder **crc32/** for **sign32.c** and its **Makefile**.

The core of sign32.c is customizable to do CRC calculation bitwise,
unrolled bitwise, tablewise or to generate the CRC table.

## Makefile

The build option `CRC32SIGN` controls the signature of the binary file
and the generation of the intel hex version from the signed binary using
`objcopy`.

```make
# build options
CRC32SIGN := 1

ifdef CRC32SIGN
 CDEFINES += -DCRC32SIGN=$(CRC32SIGN)
endif

%.$(BINLOC).bin: %.elf
    @echo $@
    $(OBJCOPY) -O binary $< $@
ifdef CRC32SIGN
    crc32/sign32 $@
    mv signed.bin $@

%.hex: %.$(BINLOC).bin
    @echo $@
    $(OBJCOPY) --change-address=$(BINLOC) -I binary -O ihex $< $@
endif
```

## Checkpoint

[Next]( 39_resistor) I will use the ADC to read a resistor value.

___
© 2020-2021 Renaud Fivet
